# School Finance: Which Factors Effect Public School Performance?

## Abstract
Education is meant to be the great equalizer that will allow all children, regardless of ethnicity, sexuality, gender expression, or familial economic status, to rise through the socioeconomic ranks to achieve a better future than generations before them. However, schools just reproduce the same inequalities that exist in the larger society. And as we live in a capitalist society, money plays a prominent role in access to and quality of resources that schools have to support their students’ growth and close inequity gaps. I use the Taxpayers’ Guide to Education Spending (2020) and the New Jersey School Performance Reports (2016-2017 & 2018-2019) from the NJ Department of Education website to compare each district in NJ’s spending activities and their school rankings. The data allows me to see how school spending and school rankings line up and investigate if there are specific categories of spending (i.e. teacher salaries, school supplies, support staff costs, etc.) that play a statistically significant role in the rankings of schools in NJ. While a district’s poverty level has the biggest impact on school rankings, I find three areas where increased spending significantly impacts school ranking.
<br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Keywords:</i> school finance, poverty, equity, per-pupil spending, school rankings

## Data
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I use the Taxpayers’ Guide to Education Spending (2020) and 2016-17 & 2018-19 New Jersey School Performance Reports from the NJ Department of Education to compare each district’s spending activities against its rankings. I am only exploring the districts that serve Kindergarten through 12th grade so that a student can spend their entire school career in the same district. Most of the data reported in the New Jersey School Performance Reports is based on data submitted by school districts through NJ SMART data collections. For assessments and exams scored through outside vendors, such as statewide assessments or SAT exams, the outside vendor provides student performance data. The Taxpayers’ Guide to Education Spending (2020) actual expenditure data for the 2018-19 school year originate from the district’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports certified by the districts’ public-school accountants. The district submits the enrollment and staffing data. My dependent variables are the ELA and Math NJSLA “met expectations” percentages for grade 10 (from 2016-17, when the 12th graders would have been in 10th grade) and 4-year High School graduation rates from the NJ School Performance Reports.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From the NJ School Performance Reports, my independent variables are the percentage of economically disadvantaged students (eligible for free and reduced lunch), Students with Disabilities (students who are classified for special education), and years of teaching experience. From the Taxpayers’ Guide to Education Spending, my independent variables are Budgetary Per Pupil Cost, Classroom Salaries and Benefits, Classroom Supplies/Textbooks, Classroom Purchased Services/Other Costs, Total Support Services, Total Operations and Maintenance of Plant, Extracurricular Costs, Total Equipment Cost, Ratio of Students to Classroom Teachers and Median Classroom Teacher Salary, and Ratio of Students to Educational Support Personnel and Median Salary.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When considering how to rank schools, I turned to US News and Niche, both websites that consistently put out school rankings. Unfortunately, I could not download the rankings from the websites themselves in a way that matched the NJ district schools’ data. Instead, based on their ranking system, I used the information I had at my disposal to create school rankings of my own. I am only looking at K12 districts; that way, it could be argued that one school district affected the entirety of a student’s academic performance from Kindergarten to graduation. While both US News and Niche use numerous factors in creating school rankings, I only use ELA and Math state test scores and the Graduation rate of each district. 10th grade, the last years students take state testing, ELA test scores are easy enough to find, but Math scores are a bit more complicated. Students take different math tests in 10th grade, depending on the academic track. Some students take Geometry in 10th grade and some students take Algebra 2 (Linden Public Schools, p. 44); therefore, I take an average of both scores to measure Math performance. This is an imperfect system, as there might be younger and older students taking each test, but it is the closest approximation of 10th grade Math state test performance that I could achieve. I then create an overall state performance value based on the average ELA and Math scores. Both US News and Niche give academic performance more weight than a school’s graduation rate. In creating my ranking, I give twice the weight to overall state performance as to graduation rates.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Although I do not have the data on students who stay in one district their entire school tenure, by measuring only K12 districts, I could reasonably extrapolate based on the data how a district’s spending would affect the graduation rate and academic performance of a student who did spend their entire schooling in that district.

## Methods
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;After cleaning and combining my different datasets based on district ID, I am left with 176 districts to analyze. I run three different multiple regressions on increasingly more specific models. To do this, I must first check that my data meet the assumptions of a regression equation. The base model for my multiple regression is the following:<br>
<pre>H_o: β_PerPup$=β_StuTeachRat=β_MedTeacSal=β_AvgTeachExpYr=β_%FRL=0<br>
H_a: β_PerPup$≠β_StuTeachRat≠β_MedTeacSal≠β_AvgTeachExpYr≠β_%FRL≠0</pre>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I am looking to analyze how significant the amount of money per pupil, the student-teacher ratio, the median teacher salary, average years of teaching experience, and the percent of students on free-and-reduced lunch in each district are towards that district’s school ranking. In models 2 and 3, I look further into specific factors of per-pupil spending and various special education teachers and support staff that also make up a school. My full model, in comparison, has 17 dependent variables.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Figure 1 shows that my independent variable, School Rank, has slight peaks above and below the center, but the data is normally distributed without any outliers. Moreover, while Graduation Rate (Figure 2) does have numerous outliers, the state test scores (Figure 3) do not, and with more weight given to the test scores than the graduation rate in School Rank, this seems to normalize.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As this is a social sciences analysis, the correlation between most of my variables could be categorized as weak. However, when using the correlation scale in education circles of 0.2-0.4 equaling moderate correlation and anything over 0.4 as a strong correlation, I have a few moderately correlated variables and one that is strongly correlated. The percentage of students on free-and-reduced lunch seems to be strongly negatively correlated with school rank, but even more so on graduation rates and test scores (which make up my school rank variable).<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To investigate this further, I create a factor variable that categorizes each district’s poverty level from very low to very high. Figure 8 shows that my base model variables have a considerable range in districts regardless of the poverty level. So, very high poverty and very low poverty districts are spending varying amounts per pupil; they have varying student-teacher ratios, and the average years of experience of the teachers in their district vary, as does the median salary of their teachers. We can conclude that a district’s poverty level is not correlated with any of the other independent variables. But Figure 9 shows the high, negative linear correlation between a district’s poverty level and its high school graduation rate and test scores. Since I am concerned mainly with how well-performing schools spend their money, including the level of district poverty as an independent variable would allow me to hold it constant in my analysis of other factors that affect school rankings.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Homoscedasticity is present, and there is no autocorrelation among the variables I use in my models. Having passed all the assumptions of a linear regression, I run my three models. The results are shown in Figures 4, 5, and 6.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;After conducting an ANOVA test to measure the goodness-of-fit, shown in Figure 7, I find that model 2 is a better fit than model 1 (my base model). But between model 2 (all variables not included in model 1) and model 3 (the full model), either could be the better fit. If I use an alpha=0.1, then model 3 is the better fit, but if I use an alpha=0.05, then model 2 is the better fit. Moreover, model 2 has an adjusted-R2 of 0.61, and model 3 has an adjusted-R2 of 0.62. Both models account for about 60% of the variance in the dependent variable that can be explained by the independent variables. As both models are similar and provide valuable insights, I use the results of both model 2 and model 3 in making my conclusions.

## Results
### <i>Model 2</i>
<pre>H_o: β_%ClassSal=β_%ClassSup=β_%ClassServ=β_%SupServ=β_%Ops=β_%Extra=β_%Equip=β_Enrollment=β_%FRL=β_%Disabled=β_%ELL=β_StuSupPerRat=β_MedSupPerSal=0<br>
H_a: β_%ClassSal≠β_%ClassSup≠β_%ClassServ≠β_%SupServ≠β_%Ops≠β_%Extra≠β_%Equip≠β_Enrollment≠β_%FRL≠β_%Disabled≠β_%ELL≠β_StuSupPerRat≠β_MedSupPerSal≠0</pre>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The p-value of the model is very small, less than 0.001. Therefore, we can reject the null hypothesis in favor of the alternate hypothesis. Certain independent variables are statistically significant predictors of the dependent variable (School Rank). With an adjusted-R2 of 0.61, the model accounts for 61% of the variance in the dependent variable that can be explained by the independent variables. Looking closely at the independent variables, at an alpha=0.05, aside from the demographic data of the student body (percent on free-and-reduced lunch, percent disabled, and percent classified as ELL students), only Median Support Personnel Salary shows as statistically significant. But when I lower the alpha level to 0.1, then the percent of per-pupil spending towards Support Services and Class Supplies is also statistically significant.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Based on the results, we can say that a $1 increase in Median Teacher Salary is associated with a 0.00014620-point increase in School Rank when holding all other variables constant. This does not seem to have much of an impact on School Rank; however, when holding all other variables constant, a 1 percentage point increase in per-pupil spending towards Support Services is associated with a 64.3-point increase in School Rank. And, when holding all other variables constant, a 1 percentage point increase in per-pupil spending that goes towards Class Supplies is associated with a 164.7-point in School Rank.

### <i>Model 3</i>
<pre>H_o: β_PerPup$=β_StuTeachRat=β_MedTeacSal=β_AvgTeachExpYr=β_%ClassSal=β_%ClassSup=β_%ClassServ=β_%SupServ=β_%Ops=β_%Extra=β_%Equip=β_Enrollment=β_%FRL=β_%Disabled=β_%ELL=β_StuSupPerRat=β_MedSupPerSal=0<br>
H_a: β_PerPup$≠β_StuTeachRat≠β_MedTeacSal≠β_AvgTeachExpYr≠β_%ClassSal≠β_%ClassSup≠β_%ClassServ≠β_%SupServ≠β_%Ops≠β_%Extra≠β_%Equip≠β_Enrollment≠β_%FRL≠β_%Disabled≠β_%ELL≠β_StuSupPerRat≠β_MedSupPerSal≠0</pre>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The p-value of the model is very small, less than 0.001. Therefore, we can reject the null hypothesis in favor of the alternate hypothesis. Certain independent variables are statistically significant predictors of the dependent variable (School Rank). With an adjusted-R2 of 0.62, the model accounts for 62% of the variance in the dependent variable that can be explained by the independent variables. Looking closely at the independent variables, at an alpha=0.05, aside from the demographic data of the student body (percent on free-and-reduced lunch and percent disabled), only Student-Teacher Ratio shows as statistically significant. But when I lower the alpha level to 0.1, then Per Pupil spending is also statistically significant.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Based on the results, we can say that when holding all other variables constant, a 1-point increase in the student-teacher ratio (meaning more students for every teacher) is associated with a 1.69-point increase in the School Rank. And, when holding all other variables constant, a $1 increase in per-pupil spending is associated with a 0.00102141 increase in School Rank. Neither variable seems to affect School Rank all that much.

### <i>Student Demographics</i>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In comparison, student demographic data is the most statistically significant variable. In both Model 2 and 3, the percent of students on free-and-reduced lunch, disabled, and classified as ELL have a similar coefficient value and p-values, so we look specifically at the effect of the variables in Model 3. When holding all other variables constant, a 1 percentage point increase in ELL is associated with a 0.31961411 increase in School Rank. And, when holding all other variables constant, a 1 percentage point increase in Disabled students is associated with a 0.54106294 decrease in School Rank. And, when holding all other variables constant, a 1 percentage point increase in students on free-and-reduced lunch is associated with a 0.41254739 decrease in School Rank. Despite student demographic data being more statistically significant, it does not change the School Rank too much.

## Discussion
### <i>Limitations and Room for Further Study</i>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is important to know that School Rank is a value from zero to one hundred. Therefore, in Model 2, when a 1 percentage point increase in per-pupil spending towards Class Supplies was associated with a 164.7-point in School Rank, it brings attention to the critical limitations of the data. A plateauing effect of all these variables on School Rank might exist that a linear regression does not account for. The student-teacher ratio is another area different from what is usually discussed – the model’s results note that an increase in the number of students per teacher positively affects School Rank. This might be associated with the fact that special education classrooms have smaller class sizes, and therefore districts with high special education students would have a smaller student-teacher ratio. And, because special education students are ordinarily exempt from state testing, the nuances of this variable are challenging to tease apart. Moreover, my School Rank marker is very simplistic; it does not account for all the variables that US News and Niche consider – perhaps, the most important being the academic performance of minority students in the district.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In further studying the data, I would also be interested in seeing if years of Principal or even Superintendent experience, as the school leadership, affects the school’s rank. Moreover, it might be prudent to specifically look into the high-poverty school districts to analyze their academic performance and how they spend their money. If I were to expand the analysis provided here, I would have accounted for schools that hold the historic Abbott designation, as some are still highly-poor while some have since gentrified, to see how their per-pupil spending breaks down.

### <i>Policy Implication</i>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The models’ results can classify the statistically significant variables into student demographics, staffing, and per-pupil spending. The variables most statistically significant are the student demographics. Schools with higher levels of poverty and students who are disabled negatively effects School Rank, while higher levels of students who are ELL positively affect School Rank. Still, the overall point value effect on School Rank is not even 1-point. But when we hold student demographics constant, money spent on class supplies and support services, the district’s student-teacher ratio, and median support personnel salary have statistically significant effects on School Rank.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The NJ Department of Education classifies class supplies as all the materials needed for all the district’s classes, such as calculators, microscopes, textbooks, tablets, laptops, workbooks, tests, markers, paper, pencils, paints, and other classroom supplies are included. Support personnel are the counselors, librarians, nurses, child study team members, and other educational support services personnel in the district. And support services consist of:
<blockquote>Attendance, social work, health and guidance services, educational media/school library services and child study team services. … This area also includes the costs associated with physical and mental health services that are not direct instruction, but are nevertheless provided to students, such as supervision of health services, health appraisal (including screening for vision, communicable diseases, and hearing deficiencies), screening for psychiatric services, periodic health examinations, emergency injury and illness care, dental services, nursing services, and communications with parents and medical officials. The expenditures of the guidance office includes counseling, record maintenance, and placement services. The costs for the child study team include salaries and benefits for members related to the development and evaluation of student individualized education programs (IEPs). … School library services include books repairs, audiovisual services, educational television services, and computer assisted instruction services. (State of New Jersey Department of Education, p. 7)</blockquote>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Taken together, support services and support personnel are the services and staff members who supplement the teaching process by assessing and improving students’ well-being. And model 2’s results show that the percentage of per-pupil spending that goes towards class supplies and support services has the most significant positive effect on School Rank (164.7 and 64.3, respectively).<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From the analysis results, we can conclude that school districts that spend more of their money on classroom supplies, whole-child support services, and retaining high-quality support personnel will be able to increase the academic achievement and graduation rate (the components of school rank) of their students. As a state, we need to encourage districts to focus more on taking care of the whole child, not just their classroom performance, but their social and emotional well-being are equally important. The literature supports this finding; when districts care for their students’ mental and emotional health, they perform better academically.
